Crokinole - Rules
-from Erik Arnenson boardgames.about.com
Crokinole, which can be traced back to
1876, remains very popular because it's a
simple and highly entertaining game of
skill.
Here are the basic rules for Crokinole.
There
are
some
regional
differences
around the world.

Players
2 players, or 4 players in partnerships.

Goal
To reach 100 points first.

Areas of the Board
The hole in the middle is the "20 Hole."
Players earn 20 points for getting a disc
into this hole.
Several inches outside the 20 Hole are
the posts, or pegs. These are bumpers
that make it more difficult to get a disc
inside that area.
The very outside area of the board, which
generally is lower than the main board,
is the "ditch." Discs which are removed
from play are put in the ditch.
The line with the largest circumference,
about an inch in from the ditch, is the
"Starting Line." All shots are made with
at least part of the disc touching the
Starting Line.
The board is divided into quadrants. When
a player takes a shot, his disc must be
50 percent or more within his quadrant.
There are three scoring areas. The area
outside the 20 Hole but inside the posts

is the 15 Zone. The next circle out marks
the 10 Zone, and the area just inside the
Starting Line is the 5 Zone. Points are
not calculated until a round ends.

Setup
Set the Crokinole board on the table so
that every player has equal access to it.
With 2 players, each receives 12 wooden
discs of a distinct color. With 4
players, each partnership receives 12
wooden discs of a distinct color; each
player within a partnership receives 6
discs. Partners sit opposite each other.
Choose the start player randomly.
always proceeds clockwise.

Play

Gameplay
Once a game starts, the board may not be
moved. Players may not move their chairs,
nor may they lift themselves out of their
chair. (This is often referred to as the
"one-cheek rule," as in "One butt cheek
must always touch the chair.") No player
may touch the board unless it's his turn
to shoot.
The shooter places one of his discs on
the starting line, with at least 50
percent of the disc within his quadrant.
He shoots the disc by flicking it
(pushing it is not legal).

Shooting With No Opponent's Discs
on the Board
The first shooter, and any subsequent
shooter who takes his turn with no
opponent's discs on the board, tries to
shoot into the 20 Hole. If a disc lands
completely within the hole, it's removed
and set aside for scoring at the end of
the round.

If the disc doesn't fall into the 20 Hole
but remains on the board, and is either
in the 15 Zone or at least touching the
15 Zone line, it remains on the board.
If there are no opponent's discs on the
board and a shooter's disc winds up in
the 10 Zone or the 5 Zone, it's removed
from the board. This rule is designed to
prevent players from being excessively
defensive by "hiding" their discs behind
pegs. Some players don't use this rule,
but it is used at the World Crokinole
Championship.

Shooting With One or More
Opponent's Discs on the Board
If one or more opponent's discs are on
the board, the shooter must try to hit
one of them. NOTE: This can be done
directly, by ricochet off a post or
another disc, or even by knocking another
of the shooter's discs into one of the
opponent's discs.
If the shooter fails to hit an opponent's
disc, the disc that he shot is placed in
the ditch. In addition, if the shooter
fails to hit an opponent's disc but hits
any of his own discs (or his partner's),
those are also placed in the ditch.

Scoring
At the end of each round, scoring takes
place.
Each player or partnership counts their
discs within each Scoring Zone. If a disc
is touching a scoring line, it counts as
the lesser value.
Discs in the 15 Zone are worth 15 points
each; in the 10 Zone, 10 points each; in
the 5 Zone, 5 points each.
Each player or partnership also adds any
20 points for each 20 Hole shot set
aside.
Subtract the smaller score from the
larger. The player or partnership with
the larger score wins the difference in
points. EXAMPLE: The tan player has 60
points. The red player has 35 points. The
tan player is awarded the difference, 25
points.

Next Round
If neither player or partnership has
reached a total of 100 points, the next
round is started by the person sitting to
the left of the lead shooter.

Miscellaneous

Winning

After a shot, all discs touching the
Starting Line are placed in the ditch.

The first to reach 100 points wins.

If a disc is leaning into the 20 Hole, or
balanced so that part of it is above the
20 Hole, it remains where it is. It is
not removed from the board unless it's
knocked into the 20 Hole.
A disc that goes off the board, hits
anything off the main board and bounces
back on is placed in the ditch. Any discs
it touched remain where they wound up.

